We can say that the theme of the Book of Romans is really about unity.
It's a marvelous example of how to break down barriers, how to break down prejudice.
Now you'll recall that there was bad blood in the Christian congregation between the Jews
and the Romans.
Some of the Jews thought they were better than anyone else because of circumcision and
because of their religious background.
And Paul doesn't just say to the Jews and the Romans, well you know you're all equal
in God's sight.
He goes further.
And his argument is masterful.
Let's turn to Romans 2, 28 and 29, and see how Paul handles this very thorny problem.
Romans chapter 2 verses 28 and 29.
For he is not a Jew who is one on the outside, nor is circumcision something on the outside
on the flesh, but he is a Jew who is one on the inside.
And his circumcision is that of the heart by spirit and not by a written code.
That person's praise comes from God, not from people.
Well now what's Paul's argument?
Paul is saying you're all of the anointed, so you are all Jews.
You are all spiritual Israelites.
And what's more, you are all circumcised.
And that includes you sisters, he says, because you're of the anointed and you have been
circumcised in the heart by Holy Spirit.
So then that gives a weight to what Paul had written to the Galatians when he said there
is neither male nor female, there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor
Friedman.
So he is completely breaking down the barriers by saying you are all one in Jesus Christ.
Now some of the verses that we love to quote in the book of Romans actually promote the
idea of unity, the fact that there is no distinction between one race and another.
For example, Romans 3.23 all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God.
Romans 5.12 through one man, our common ancestor Adam, sin, anointed of the world and death
through sin.
Well why was Paul so insistent on the need for unity?
Perhaps he didn't know at the time, but Jehovah knew.
Paul wrote his letter in 56 CE.
Now what was the situation in Rome at the time?
The emperor Claudius, the one who had expelled all the Jews from Rome, had died, and a new
emperor, a very promising one, had taken the throne, Nero.
Now it may seem strange to say that Nero was a very promising emperor, but historians
tell us that during the first five years of his reign, Nero was a very good emperor.
In fact, the Roman historian, contemporary historian, Gaeus Sutonius, had this to say,
Nero started off with a parade of virtue.
He never missed an opportunity of being generous or merciful.
If he could not abolish some of the heavier taxes, he lowered them.
They have asked to sign a death warrant for a convicted felon.
He would sigh, ah, how I wish I had never learned to write.
Once when the senate passed a vote of thanks to him, he answered, wait until I deserve them.
And the fact is that Nero was popular with the poor right up to his death.
Now incidentally, it would have been during that five-year period that the Apostle Paul
told Philemon that he was optimistic of being released when he appeared before Nero.
It appears that Paul thought that Nero would have been fair.
And Nero did have a background in law.
Nero had actually fought cases, argued cases before the courts in his youth.
So what's the point?
Although in private, Nero was debauched in public, he was very good.
He was a solid emperor.
And the Christians may have thought that they were going to enter into a period of peace.
Here is a man who was fair.
Here is a man who was just.
Here is a man who doesn't like putting people to death.
What a mistake that would have been.
Now in his letter, Paul sends greetings to more than 26 men and women in Rome.
And in one way, it makes us sad to read the list, Mary, Andronicus, Junius, Urbinaus,
Rufus.
Knowing as we do that eight years later, many of them would be dead, mulled to death by
wild dogs or burned alive in Nero's gardens.
It makes Paul's words recorded at Romans 8, 17 almost chilling to read, where Paul says
provided that we suffer together so that we may be glorified together.
Those Christians in Rome were going to suffer together.
And Paul, right along with them in Rome, about a year after the rest of them, and wouldn't
have been a pity if those Christians were united only in death but never in life.
They needed to learn to love one another so that when faced with death, someone didn't
say, I really don't know if this is the truth because there's a lack of love in the congregation.
Well who have applied Paul's counsel today?
The Catholic Church?
In World War II, in the city of Rome, there were Jews, and there were Romans.
How did the Romans treat the Jews?
The Vatican and Pius, Italian Catholics, looked silently by, while 7,500 Jews were hauled
off to the concentration camps in Auschwitz.
They never said a word and few returned alive.
Now what a contrast with Jehovah's people who have risked their lives on behalf of fellow
believers in many countries, no matter what their race, no matter what their nationality,
doesn't make you feel good to belong to an organization where there truly are no foreigners.